Animal Information
Animals are found all around the world. They are of differed sizes, shapes and colors even if they belong to the same animal family. Each kind of animal continues to fascinate us with their own unique behavior and lifestyle. One can be amazed with the way mammals nurture and take care of their young ones just like human beings. There are insects that go through the process of metamorphosis. This process is an amazing transformation from eggs to larvae to pupae and the final look. And then there are the reptiles, a relative of dinosaur,lay eggs distant relative of birds.

Animals are a part of vast life in this world. They constitute a majority of this world's population. Animal Information is easily available in the internet. Let us look at the wildlife variety in brief. 
Let us take a look at the animal kingdom: 

1. Common wildlife: These are the animals that survive the plains and the deserts all over the world. Camels, elephants, giraffes, lions, monkeys are a few to name. They can be found in Africa, America, Australia and some Asian countries.
2. Animals that live in groups and burrows: These animals live in small and large groups. Their strength and survival depends on their quantity. Some examples of these animals are Atlantic puffins, badgers, deer, hedgehogs, mice, stoats and weasels.
3. Reptiles: Dinosaurs are the first species of reptiles. They were much larger than the reptiles found today.Alligators, caimans, crocodiles, gharials, lizards, turtles, snakes, tortoises, tuataras are examples of reptiles.

4. Pets: Tamed animals that can stay with human beings are termed as pets. They do not create any major damage to human lives and are considered helpers in the human world. Dogs, cats, guinea pigs, hamsters, mice and rabbits are pets.
5. Insects: Insects are found everywhere, whether you like it or not. They make up more than half of all the living things found on earth. There are more than a million species of insects. Ants, bees, beetles, butterflies, centipedes, dragonflies, grasshopper, ladybirds, millipedes, moths, spiders, worms, and wasps are a few to name.

6. Farm Animals: Farm animals are all the domestic animals useful to mankind. Chickens, cows, ducks, goats, horses, pigs, sheep and llamas are a few to name.
7. Marine Animals: These are the ones found in water. Some on them can be dangerous and some very playful. Dolphins, crabs, fish, jellyfish, penguins, seahorses, sharks, whales and seals are a few of them.
8. Rainforest animals: They are found deep in the rainforests and are thousands in number. Some of them are yet to be discovered. They include, rainforest bats, Bengal tigers, forest elephants, rainforest parrots, poison arrow frogs, rainforest snakes, toco toucans and jambu fruit dove .
9. Galapagos Wildlife: It is an animal civilization which was discovered by Darwin. They include some of the world's most special species found nowhere in the world. Galapagos land birds, galapagos sea birds, galapagos shore birds, galapagos crabs, galapagos giant tortoises, galapagos mammals, galapagos marine life and galapagos reptiles are examples of this kind.
10. Venomous Animals: Animals that have venom or toxic substance in any part of the body and use it to their defense are termed as venomous animals. They are poisonous in nature and can be fatal as well. Although at present they are believed to be less poisonous and attack only when they are frightened or threatened. In this section you can learn about venomous mammals, venomous snakes and venomous spiders. 
11. Endangered Animals: Endangered species are the ones which are in the verge of extinction. More and more,animals species, all over the world, are becoming endangered and this is a threat to the ecology.
12. Animal Biomes: Biome is often referred as the ecosystem. As the temperature, moisture, light, of a particular region varies from another, so does the animal and plant lifeof the region. The three major biome classifications are: terrestrial biome, freshwater biome and ocean biome.

